= Wilderness Search and Rescue Simulation

== Setup

To play with this code you should have Java 6 or 7. It is highly recommended that you have Maven installed. With maven:

* mvn package

Doing so will create two files: wisar.jar and wisar.war.  The jar can be used to run batch simulations. The war file is
the web application

=== Command Line Batch Mode
Use this class SimBuilder[https://github.com/deriggi/wilderness-sar/blob/master/src/main/java/middletier/SimBuilder.java] to run a high volume of agents. Output will be sent to the output folder specified in WisarPaths[https://github.com/deriggi/wilderness-sar/blob/master/src/main/java/util/WisarPaths.java] 


=== Genetic Algorithm
After the basic terrain walking elements were constructed, a genetic algorithm was experimented with for its ability to generate a terrain walking agent.
The core of the algorithm is here: GeneticAgentMaker[https://github.com/deriggi/wilderness-sar/blob/master/src/main/java/genetic/GeneticAgentMaker.java].
The driver which runs the genetic algorithm is here: GeneticSimBuilder[https://github.com/deriggi/wilderness-sar/blob/master/src/main/java/genetic/GeneticSimBuilder.java]


== Visualisations

One of the metrics the agents use to decide when to change directions is the moving average of the dot-product of velocity: map[http://cdb.io/13kLToh]



== Abstract
Search and rescue cases studies offer interesting insights into the thought process of a lost person. There is evidence 
that the behavior of a lost person is inextricably linked to how they perceive the problem of being lost. If panic 
presides, then behavior could be irrational, repetitive, and counter-intuitive. If a calm, disciplined, and 
problem-solving mindset takes reign, then the patterns of motion are predictable and are often the product of a careful 
evaluation of options. Regardless of a person’s mindset, some wilderness environments have within them only a few places
traversable by someone with average athletic ability. From the perspective of simulation and modeling, the combination of a person’s mindset and the 
terrain on which they’re lost should be reasonable input variables into a model attempting to predict the lost person’s 
most likely path. Taken a significant step further, if unmanned aerial vehicles enabled with terrain recognition and 
navigation capabilities derived from basic artificial intelligence principles could harness such a model, then they 
should also be able to efficiently search for lost people across a space of wilderness. If achievable in the real 
world, search and rescue teams could become more effective, less costly, and less dangerous to those doing the searching. 

This medley of psychology, technology, and wilderness is explored through the use of a bespoke agent based simulation in which lost persons are pitted against their own disorientation and a Nevada mountain range. Developing the simulation and running evaluations with various agent types revealed demonstrable effects of the agents’ ability to navigate unfamiliar terrain and their likelihood of being detected by person-seeking aerial vehicles. More thoughtful and less erratic lost-person behavior makes it more likely for the agent to travel far from its starting location. Lost persons considering a smaller set of options were more often detected by the search vehicles. From the air, teams that collaborated on route quality were more likely to make detections. Developing a set of nuanced lost person agents was the focus of the development. Further research could improve this study by building more diversity into the search vehicle behaviors and the geography of the wilderness.

Section&nbsp;1[https://github.com/deriggi/wilderness-sar/wiki]
